----------------------- Page 1-----------------------

         Sri  Lanka  Institute  of  Information 
                             Technology 

                          POSITION  PAPER 

      Portable  Solution  for High  Secure 
Encryption  of  Removable  Storage Media 

       Author:                                                Lecturer: 

       Tharindu Piyasekara                 Dr.  Samantha Thelijjagda 

                                 Assignment 

                           RESEARCH METHODS 

                    Department of Information Technology 

                                  July 2014 

----------------------- Page 2-----------------------

            SRI LANKA INSTITUTE OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 

                                        Abstract 

                                     Faculty of Computing 

                           Department of Information Technology 

                         MSc in IT (Specialization:  Cyber Security) 

Portable  Solution  for  High  Secure  Encryption  of  Removable  Storage  Media 

                                  by Tharindu Piyasekara 

Although there are cryptographic solutions already developed for data encryption pur- 

poses, there are situations where the removable devices cannot be encrypted or decrypted 

as the required sources are not available such as when the user is travelling.          This is a 

one  of  major  reasons  to  data  leakage  outside  the  organization.  Proposed  solution  is  a 

portable device which can be used to secure removable data storage devices.  This posi- 

tion paper mainly discusses proposed research methodology and the ways which intend 

to evaluate the data.  It includes a brief discussion on what the ﬁnal goal to be achieved, 

importance  of  this  research,  research  methods  which  are  going  to  use  to  achieve  the 

goals, and ﬁnally the potential outcomes of the research. 

----------------------- Page 3-----------------------

Contents 

Abstract                                                                                                    i 

Contents                                                                                                   ii 

List  of  Figures                                                                                         iii 

Abbreviations                                                                                             iv 

1   Research  Question  &  Objective                                                                        1 
     1.1   Research Question        .  .  . . . . . . .  .  . . . . .  . .  .  . . .  .  . . .  .  . . .  .  . 2 
     1.2   Research Objectives         .  . . .  . . . . . . .  .  . . . . .  .  . .  . .  .  . . .  .  . . . 2 

2   Literature  Review                                                                                      4 
     2.1   Encryption Applications Developed For Run On Computers                      .  .  . . .  .  . .  5 
     2.2   Encrypted Secure Drives  .        .  . . .  .  . . . . . . .  .  . . . .  .  .  . . .  .  . . .  . 5 

3   Research  Methodology                                                                                   7 

4   Data  Collection                                                                                       10 
     4.1   Data Collecting      .  . .  .  . . .  .  . . . . . . .  .  . . .  .  . . .  .  .  . . .  .  . . . . 10 
     4.2   Data Analyzing       .  . .  .  . . .  .  . . . . . . .  .  . . .  .  .  . . .  .  . . .  .  . . . . 11 
     4.3   Data Evaluating        .  . . .  . . .  .  . .  . . . . . .  .  . . .  .  . . .  .  . . .  .  . . . 11 
     4.4   Ethics in Data Collection         . .  . . .  .  . .  . . . . . . .  .  . . .  .  . . .  .  . . . 11 

A   Project  Plan                                                                                          12 

Bibliography                                                                                               14 

                                                      ii 

----------------------- Page 4-----------------------

List  of  Figures 

      2.1    Existing Solution          .  .  . .  .  . .  .  . .  .  . .  . .  .  .  . .  .  . . .  .  .  . .  .  . .  .  .     6 

      3.1    Solution Outline           .  .  .  . .  .  . .  . .  .  . .  .  . .  . .  .  .  . .  .  . . .  .  .  . .  .  .     8 

      4.1    Data Collection Methods                  . .  .  . .  .  . .  .  . .  . .  .  .  . . .  .  .  . .  .  .  . .  .    11 

     A.1     Project Plan         .  .  .  . .  .  .  . .  .  . . .  .  .  .  . .  .  . . .  .  .  . .  .  .  . .  .  .  .  .   13 

                                                               iii 

----------------------- Page 5-----------------------

Abbreviations 

                               BYOD         Bring Your Own Device 

                               IT           Information Technologyr 

                               MTP          Media Transport Protocol 

                               OS           Operating  System 

                               USB          Universal Serial Bus 

                                                     iv 

----------------------- Page 6-----------------------

Chapter 1 

Research  Question  &  Objective 

The  ﬁeld  of  information  security  has  evolved  and  grown  signiﬁcantly  in  recent  years. 

IT  security  specialists  are  almost  always  found  in  any  major  enterprise/establishment 

due  to  the  nature  and  value  of  the  data  within  larger  businesses  and  as  well  as  in  the 

personal life.  It is said that it is necessary to keep all the technologies within the company 

secure from malicious cyber-attacks that often attempt to breach private and sensitive 

information or gain control of the internal systems.          The average cost of a data breach 

from any source ranges from $100,000 to about $2.5 million. 

Removable Media ease the moving of data for storage and business purposes in day-today 

life. USB and Media Transport Protocol (MTP) supported devices (e.g.                    thumb drive, 

MP3  player,  camera,  smart  phone,  portable  hard  disks  etc.)         have  become  important 

devices  which  interact  with  the  computer.        Information  security  plays  a  major  role 

in  this  scenario  as  the  removable  media  are  also  being  used  to  transmit  secure  data. 

Cryptography,  access controlling mechanisms and information classiﬁcation techniques 

are used to ensure the security of sensitive information within the company. 

BYOD is now common in organization;  those devices  can be personal computers,  mo- 

bile  phones,  and  other  data  storage  devices.    This  adds  more  challenges  to  the  remov- 

able device data security.      According to the industrial expertise, surveys carried out in 

diﬀerent  organizations  and  also  the  other  researchers  who  have  done  researches  on  in- 

formation  security  domain  have  mentioned  that  the  external  removable  devices  owned 

by the organization and personal devices do not possess the same level of security that 

the organization information possess internally.  The level of security of the information 

                                                   1 

----------------------- Page 7-----------------------

Chapter 1.  Research Question & Objective                                                           2 

or the data extracted from a particular organization is poor compared to the data when 

inside the organization.  A SanDisk survey shows 25% of data corporate end users most 

frequently copying customer data.  Organizations have the full responsibility of customer 

data  after  collecting  the  data  from  the  customer.    Most  of  the  time,  the  auditors  and 

policy developers forget these kinds of scenarios and because of that this security level 

of  removable  devices  becomes  poor  compared  to  the  security  level  in  the  internal  sys- 

tems.   Due  to  this  reason,  the  removable  devices  have  become  weak  linkers  and  easily 

attackable points as well as a common vulnerability in information security. 

1.1      Research Question 

The information leakages occurring due to unsecured removable devices have become one 

of major threats to the ﬁeld of information security.         Although there are cryptographic 

solutions  already  developed  for  data  encryption  purposes,  there  are  situations  where 

the  removable  devices  cannot  be  encrypted  or  decrypted  as  the  required  sources  are 

not available such as when the user is travelling.        This is because when there is a need 

of  encrypting  or  decrypting  data  in  a  removable  device,  it  has  to  be  plugged  in  to  a 

computer in which a particular data protection application is already installed to carry 

out with the process of cryptography. 

User’s  need  is  to  have  a  user-friendly  and  an  easy  way  to  secure  data.  And  on  other 

hand the security professionals’  purpose is  to make sure that the data  is secured after 

applying cryptographic mechanisms to data.  The problem is to solve this problem and 

make sure the solution fulﬁlls both the requirements.  Otherwise it is not going to be a 

good solution to this problem.  The research quest is How to provide a user-friendly and 

a secure solution for the removable data storages devices. 

1.2      Research Objectives 

This proposed research is to identify the user requirements and accept security level of 

removable  devices  and  design  and  develop  a  portable  cryptographic  solution  to  secure 

the  data  in  the  removable  devices.   This  is  a  fast  and  handy  solution  with  a  portable 

device.  Proposed device is small in size, user-friendly and the ideal solution is to address 

----------------------- Page 8-----------------------

Chapter 1.  Research Question & Objective                                                         3 

and  respond  the  current  issues  in  data  leakage  occurring  due  to  unsecured  removable 

devices in an eﬀective manner. 

Main  objective – The main objective of this research project is to ﬁnd out a solution 

for data leakage taking place due to unsecured removable data storage devices. 

The  main  objective  is  split  up  into  following  four  speciﬁc  objectives 

1) Designing a speciﬁc low cost device to encrypt the data stored in removable 

storage  media:     Introduction  to  the  thesis  topic 

Encrypting data in the removable storage devices is not considered as a very important 

thing  even  in  organizational  level.  It  is  very  important  to  protect  the  sensitive  data 

specially when taken out of an organization on diﬀerent purposes.  The proposed device 

is  capable  of  encrypting  and  decrypting  data  in  the  removable  storage  media  in  the 

absence of a typical computer. 

2) Identifying the user requirements and creating a handy device The proposed 

device with the crypto mechanisms will be user friendly, small in size and light-weighted 

where the user is able to carry it whenever necessary.  Also the requirements gap will be 

identiﬁed and ﬁlled using a survey. 

3) Identifying and developing a device that possess a high durability The life 

time  of  the  device  depends  on  the  durability  of  the  battery. The  proposed  device  will 

possess a quite sound life time and hence the user will be provided with a device which 

has a high durability compared to the other battery powered devices. 

4) Analyzing the processes and decreasing the time consumption for encrypt- 

ing  (increases  the  speed  of  encrypting  data) The proposed application has to be 

more eﬃcient so that the user will ﬁnd it is easier to encrypt the data as they wish and 

would not waste time. 

----------------------- Page 9-----------------------

Chapter 2 

Literature  Review 

In  cryptography,   a  Caesar  cipher,   which  is  also  known  as  Caesar’s  cipher,  the  shift 

cipher,  Caesar’s  code  or  Caesar  shift,  is  one  of  the  simplest  and  most  widely  known 

and  used  encryption  techniques.    It  indicates  and  proves  that  the  information  security 

is not just a brand new problem which suddenly arose in this century but was an issue 

from  a  quite  long  time.   The  researchers  were  able  to  overcome  those  problems  for 

some extent providing various types of solutions.        The ﬁeld of information security has 

grown  and  expanded  signiﬁcantly  during  last  few  years  with  the  modern  technology. 

The researchers are already working on the researches based on security issues and the 

currently available solutions are capable of addressing some of the security issues only. 

In this chapter the existing ideas, alternatives considered in this problem are discussed. 

Since  the  problem  is  not  solved  completely,  many  researchers  are  carrying  out  various 

types of researches to fulﬁll the gap.  Some expertise says that the security of the physical 

drives cannot be guaranteed without compromising the beneﬁts of portability.  But there 

are some alternative solutions addressing this problem.  As I identiﬁed, there are mainly 

two types of researches carrying out on this area. 

    •  Encryption applications developed to run on computers 

    •  Encrypted secure drives 

                                                4 

----------------------- Page 10-----------------------

Chapter 2.  Literature Review                                                                    5 

2.1      Encryption Applications Developed For Run On Com- 

         puters 

Using  this  sort  of  encryption  software  is  the  most  common  way  to  secure  data.      In 

here, the particular software has to be installed on a computer and user needs to plug 

the  device  into  the  computer  and  carry  out  the  process  of  encryption  to  secure  the 

data.   But  the  limitation  is  that  this  application  might  change  from  OS  to  OS  since 

those  applications  have  diﬀerent  ﬂavors  for  diﬀerent  OSs.    Encryption  algorithms  are 

used here to secure the data.  Encrypted data can be copied into the removable storage 

device.  Whenever  user  needs  to  make  use  of  the  encrypted  data,  the  device  has  to  be 

plugged into the computer and should follow the process of decrypting. 

E.g.:  – Trucrpt, BitLocker (formerly BitLocker Drive Encryption) 

Even though there is a warning that using TrueCrypt is not secure, Trucrpt holds a top 

rank among the other encryption software available.          Trucrpt has diﬀerent versions for 

Windows, Linux and Mac OS separately.  And BitLocker is a full disk encrypting feature 

included with the Windows OS. It is designed to protect data by providing encryption 

for entire volume. 

2.2      Encrypted Secure Drives 

These devices are self-encrypted devices.  After coping data into these devices, the data 

will  be  automatically  encrypted.   Whenever  the  user  needs  to  use  the  encrypted  data, 

the user will simply have to plug the device into computer and decrypt the data.  Some 

of these solutions have certiﬁcations and some of the devices having their own algorithm 

do  not  have  certiﬁcations.  Normal  portable  storage  devices  cannot  be  converted  into 

encrypted secure drives and these devices  are specially designed for the purpose of se- 

curing data and such devices are highly expensive compared to the price of the normal 

removable storage devices. 

E.g.: – Data Traveler Vault devices developed by Kingston, devices developed by Rohde 

& Schwarz SIT 

----------------------- Page 11-----------------------

Chapter 2.  Literature Review                                                                 6 

Above mentioned solutions have pros and cons.  The ﬁgure 2.1 contains a discussion of 

alternatives solutions. 

                                Figure  2.1:  Existing Solution 

As mentioned in above table, those two products have Pros and Cons.  None of it fulﬁlls 

the required gap of the research problem. 

----------------------- Page 12-----------------------

Chapter 3 

Research  Methodology 

Previous chapter brieﬂy described the background of the problem.  This chapter brieﬂy 

describes the  research  methodology  and methods  followed  in this  research  project  and 

why this was chosen and more details on nature problems and clearly positioning of the 

research within the existing ideas. 

Proposed  research  will  follow  a  deductive  methodology.          This  research  uses  existing 

theories on data encryption research domain and new experiments to ﬁnd out the new 

facts.  Objectives are clearly deﬁned in this research but research problem is not directly 

deﬁned.    The  proposal  is  to  design  and  develop  a  solution  and  to  ﬁnd  out  a  better 

solution  for  the  research  problems.    In  this  research,  accessing  and  using  some  part  of 

the research is already being completed in the cryptography domain.                This project has 

two sections.  One is developing the proposed solution and the other is collecting data to 

determine the success of the research.  By considering the nature of this research this will 

be conducted as a structured exploratory applied research.             The next section describes 

more about data collection. 

Medium  size  organizations  cannot  replace  all  there  thumb  drives  by  encrypted  secure 

drives since the cost of those devices is very high compared to the normal removable data 

storage  devices  in  the  market.   Also  those  solutions  do  not  follow  the  concept  BOYD. 

Nowadays researchers and business analysts show that the percentage of using their own 

devices at oﬃce is increasing due to user-friendliness and in 2017 half of employees will 

use  their  own  devices  at  the  working  place.   In  this  case  the  existing  solutions  are  not 

suﬃcient enough to address the security threats that could possibly arise regarding the 

                                                  7 

----------------------- Page 13-----------------------

Chapter 3.  Research Methodology                                                                     8 

organizational data because those devices are not ﬁtting with current situations of the 

problem.  As an example people tend to use smart phones rather than using a computer 

to  check  e-mail.   Millennial  users  are  always  fond  of  mobility  and  new  technologies. 

Figure 3.1 shows the considering areas of this research. 

                              Figure  3.1:  Proposed Solution Outline 

Figure  shows  the  areas  considering  when  designing  the  device  which  can  be  used  to 

secure the removable data storage devices. 

Single board computers will be used as the device and it is powered by a battery and will 

be modiﬁed in such a way it can be used to encrypt and decrypt the data in portable 

storage devices.  Linux base OS runs on top of this device and also this device will consist 

of an interface to commutate with the user.          This device will be known as crypto hub. 

User can plug the removable device in to the crypto hub and carry out encryption and 

decryption  processes.     Crypto  hub  encrypts  the  data  in  the  plugged  storage  device  so 

that the data is encrypted and user will not have to worry about the security of the data 

in the removable device and that could be carried anywhere the user goes with no harm 

to the data.  The user has to plug the removable device back to crypto hub and decrypt 

the encrypted data to make use of the data in the removable device.                User is provided 

with  diﬀerent  security  level  and  is  allowed  to  select  the  options  preferred  according  to 

the requirement.  The two factor authentications will be used for the process encryption. 

The password has to be provided by the user and the device will validate the removable 

----------------------- Page 14-----------------------

Chapter 3.  Research Methodology                                                                    9 

device  before  the  process  of  encryption,  making  it  a  trust  worthy,  reliable  and  a  more 

secure encryption mechanism to encrypt the data in removable devices.  In a case if the 

user is unable to provide the password the user will be provided with an alternative way 

to decrypt the encrypted data. 

----------------------- Page 15-----------------------

Chapter 4 

Data Collection 

In this chapter the data that should be collected, how they are going to be analyzed and 

evaluated, the related issues of access, ethics needed to be addressed will be discussed. 

This section mainly consists of two sub topics.  Data collection related steps and ethics 

in data collection. 

4.1     Data Collecting 

This  research  mainly  depends  on  the  primary  data.  Primary  data  is  used  to  measure 

the eﬀectiveness of the solution and secondary data is used to identify where the issue 

is and the direction of the research. 

After completing the development part of the solution, the performance and other qual- 

itative measurement details has to be considered to measure eﬀectiveness and the eﬃ- 

ciency of the proposed solution.  Below table shows the primary data collection methods 

for the research. 

Company records or archives, government publications, industry analysis oﬀered by the 

media, websites etc.  will be used as secondary data collection methods in this project. 

                                              10 

----------------------- Page 16-----------------------

Chapter 4.  Data Collection                                                                       11 

                              Figure  4.1:  Data Collection Methods 

4.2      Data Analyzing 

Analyzing the collected information plays an important role in this project.             Data col- 

lected by observations, interviews and questionnaires are needed to be combined together 

and ﬁnd out the relationships in between those variables and what the impact is for the 

ﬁnal objective of the research. 

4.3      Data Evaluating 

After  analyzing  those  collected  variable  values,  the  next  step  is  evaluating  those  data. 

Some variable values will be modiﬁed in this case in order to identify the correct rela- 

tionships between variables and to ﬁnd out the best solution for the problem. 

4.4      Ethics in Data Collection 

In  the  phase  of  data  collection,  the  information  given  by  a  particular  individual  and 

an  organization  should  be  treated  highly  conﬁdential.      Each  entity  should  be  treated 

as atomistic entity and there will be no comparison done with the given information of 

another entity.  Individual or organization is not relevant to the objectives of this study. 

These should be convinced to the respondent prior to the request for information. 

----------------------- Page 17-----------------------

Appendix  A 

Project  Plan 

FIGURE  A.1  shows  the  project  plan  of  the  proposed  research  project. Development 

start date of the project is 1st of Aug 2014 and planed end date is 1st of Des 2014. 

                                      12 

----------------------- Page 18-----------------------

Appendix A. Project Plan                                                                 13 

                                 Figure  A.1:  Project Plan 

----------------------- Page 19-----------------------

Bibliography 

[1]  Meulen R.V.D. 2013 Gartner Predicts by 2017, Half of Employers will Require Em- 

    ployees to Supply Their Own Device for Work Purposes [Internet]. Gartner, STAM- 

    FORD, Conn. http://www.gartner.com/newsroom/id/2466615 

[2]  Tabaka,  G,  2013.  Haking  On  Demand.  2nd  ed.  02-682  Warszawa,  ul,  Bokserska  1: 

    Software Press Sp. Z o.o SK. 

[3]  Sundaram, G.S, 2013. Bluetooth communication using a touch screen interface with 

    the Raspberry Pi. 1st ed. Jacksonville, FL: Available from:IEEE. 

[4]  Ferguson,  N,  2006.  AES  CBC  Elephant  diﬀuser  A  Disk  Encryption  Algorithm  for 

    Windows Vista . 1st ed. Microsoft:  Microsoft Corp. 

[5]  NOISE.    2012.    Raspberry     Photoplethysmograph.        [ONLINE]       Available    at: 

    http://www.noise.inf.u-szeged.hu/Instruments/raspberryplet/.           [Accessed   07   June 

    14]. 

[6]  SecurPassword.2014.Secur             Password.[ONLINE]               Available           at: 

    https://www.securenvoy.com/products/securpassword/overview.shtm.[Accessed 

    07 June 14]. 

[7]  Gomes, , O.S.M. 2011, A fast cryptography pipelined hardware developed in FPGA 

    with VHDL. Available from IEEE, [Accessed 07 June 14]. 

                                               14 
